---
title: >-
  Knowledge, Information and Data
slug: old22
date: 2005-01-13T13:36:41
themes: ['Information Economy']
tags: []
projects: []
posttypes: []
featured: False
provenance: [ wordpress, rufuspollock.org, migration-201703 ]
wordpress:
  - post_id: 22
---

<h2>
	Introduction
</h2>
<p>
	I propose the following hierarchy: data -- information -- knowledge. Where items in one category are refined and filtered in the process of going to the next.</p>

<h2>
	Short Quotes
</h2>
<blockquote>
	<p>
		Information is not knowledge. Knowledge is not wisdom. Wisdom is not truth. Truth is not beauty. Beauty is not love. Love is not music. Music is the best.
	</p>
</blockquote>
<p>
	Source: Frank Zappa, Album: Joe's Garage, Track: Packard Goose</p>

<blockquote>
	<p>
		Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?
		<br />
		Where is the knowledge we have in information?
	</p>
</blockquote>
<p>
	Source: T.S. Eliot <em>Choruses from <q>The Rock</q></em></p>

<h2>
	Information and Knowledge
</h2>
<blockquote refId="dosi_ea_1998" loc="148-149">
	<p>
		Information may be defined as data relating to states of the world and the state-contingent consequences that follow from events in the world that are either naturally or socially caused. The total set of data is closed in that there is a closed set of states and consequences.</p>
	<p>
		....</p>
	<p>
		.... Following the philosopher Dretske (1982), the tight coupling [between information and knowledge] may be expressed in the following way: information is a commodity that is capable of yielding knowledge; and knowledge is identified with information-produced (or sustained) belief. As this formulation makes clear, the line of causation is from information to knowledge. <em>Knowledge is processed information.</em> [emphasis added]</p>
</blockquote>
<p>
	Fransman, Martin in dosi_ea_1998, p. 148-149</p>

