---
title: >-
  The Taxonomy of the Chinese Encyclopedia
slug: OLD27
date: 2005-02-08T21:28:25
themes: []
tags: ['Intellectual Myths']
projects: []
posttypes: []
featured: False
provenance: [ wordpress, rufuspollock.org, migration-201703 ]
wordpress:
  - post_id: 27
---

<p>
	At the start of Foucault's book <em>The Order of Things</em> the classification system of a Chinese encyclopedia is presented. It commences <q>a) belonging to the Emperor, b) embalmed, c) tame, d) sucking pigs, e) sirens, f) fabulous, g) stray dogs, h) included in the present classification, i) frenzied, j) innumerable, k) drawn with a very fine camelhair brush, l) et cetera, m) having just broken the water pitcher, n) that from a long way off look like flies.</q>
<p>
	But in fact, as Foucault acknowledges, there is no such encyclopedia, rather it the brilliant fiction of Borges in a short story entitled <em>The Analytical Language of John Wilkins</em>. Nevertheless the idea has entered our culture, and is often presented as fact rather than fantasy - being adduced as evidence that no classification system, and no viewpoint on the world, is special and any more correct than any other.
</p>

<h3>
	Excerpt from <em>The Analytical Language of John Wilkins</em>
</h3>
<blockquote>
	<p>	
		These ambiguities, redundancies and deficiencies remind us of those which doctor Franz Kuhn attributes to a certain Chinese encyclopaedia entitled 'Celestial Empire of benevolent Knowledge'. In its remote pages it is written that the animals are divided into: (a) belonging to the emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, (d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, (g) stray dogs, (h) included in the present classification, (i) frenzied, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very fine camelhair brush, (l) et cetera, (m) having just broken the water pitcher, (n) that from a long way off look like flies.
	</p>
	<p>
		The Bibliographic Institute of Brussels exerts chaos too: it has divided the universe into 1000 subdivisions, from which number 262 is the pope; number 282, the Roman Catholic Church; 263, the Day of the Lord; 268 Sunday schools; 298, mormonism; and number 294, brahmanism, buddhism, shintoism and taoism. It doesn't reject heterogene subdivisions as, for example, 179: <q>Cruelty towards animals. Animals protection. Duel and suicide seen through moral values. Various vices and disadvantages. Advantages and various qualities.</q>
	</p>
</blockquote>


<h3>
	References
</h3>
<ol>
	<li>
		Borges short story <a href="http://www.crockford.com/wrrrld/wilkins.html">The Analytical Language of John Wilkins</a>
	</li>
	<li>
		<a href="http://www.nationalreview.com/15sept97/windschuttle091597.html">Interesting article</a> that describes use of Chinese encyclopedia by cultural relativists (often without realizing it is fiction).
	</li>
</ol>

