---
title: >-
  Milgram Obedience Experiments
slug: milgram-obedience-experiments
date: 2016-01-02T16:38:20
provenance: [ wordpress, rufuspollock.org, migration-201703 ]
wordpress:
  - page_id: 1483
---

This morning I wish to talk about a very interesting psychology experiment. The
experiment was carried out over thirty years ago in the United States by
Milgram, but in repetitions around the world over the years the original
findings have been confirmed.

Milgram's study was an investigation of obedience. How willing people were to
obey an authority figure. The experiment ran as follows:

Milgram advertised for men to participate in a psychology experiment at Yale
University. Out of the respondents to the advert 40 men were selected. When
they arrived at the experimental laboratory they were told they had earned
their participation fee by turning up and that they were free to leave at any
time.

Then the experimenter introduced each of the participants to someone who the
participants were told was another participant. In fact the man they were
introduced to was a 47 year-old accountant who was actually a confederate of
the experimenter.

Next the experimenter explained to the participant that this experiment was
investigating whether punishment improves learning and of the two men (the
participant and the confederate) one would be the learner and the other would
be the teacher. The teacher would then give the learner a test and punish
mistakes with electric shocks.

After a rigged draw in which the actual participant always became the teacher
and the confederate the learner, both men were led to a room which contained
what looked like an electric chair. The learner was strapped into the chair and
an electrode was attached to the learner's wrist.

The teacher was then take to a control room where there was a bank of 30
switches labelled from 15 to 450 volts. Groups of switches also had labels
ranging from Slight Shock up to Danger: Extreme Shock. The shock generator was
then demonstrated to the teacher by giving him a 45 volt shock.

After a short demonstration of the testing procedure the teacher was told to
start testing the learner. This involved giving a verbal test to the learner
and then punishing mistakes by giving an electric shock. Moreover for each
subsequent mistake the voltage was increased a level.

As the teacher increased voltage levels from 15 the learner would says little
except "Ow" occasionally. At 120 volts the learner said, "This really hurts".
At the 150-volt level the learner yelled loudly and said "Experiment! That's
all. Get me out of here. I told you that I had heart trouble. I refuse to go
on." The experiment would then calmly tell the teacher to continue. Again the
learner would get a question wrong, and after the 165 volt shock would yell and
start saying, "Let me out." Again after being told to continue, the teacher
would continue. After 180volts the learner yelled, "I can't stand the pain."
After 195 volts the learner started screaming, "Let me out of here. My heart's
bothering me. You have no right to keep me here."

Many teachers at this point expressed concern that they might kill the learner.
The experimenter, in strong terms, ordered the teacher to continue.

By this point, as the teacher pulled higher voltage switches the learner was
screaming. At 300 volts the learner was virtually in hysterics and said that he
would not answer any more questions. The experimenter calmly informed the
teacher that lack of an answer constituted a wrong answer and told the teacher
to continue. Teachers who had reached this point typically became very nervous
and agitated. Nevertheless they continued. After an appalling scream at 315
volts, the learner collapsed into silence. All the way from 330 volts to 450
volts the learner neither responded to questions nor reacted to the shocks. For
all the teacher knew the learner was dead or dying.

How many people do you think would continue to administer shocks up to the 450
volt level? And remember the experimenter had no power over the participants,
at any point they could have taken their money and left. One of the
participants? Two? Five? 

Very disturbingly, in Milgram's experiment 65% of men went all the way to the
450 volt level. No participant disobeyed the experiment before the 300 volt
level at which the learner had screamed and refused to answer any more
questions. In a similar experiment in Germany 85% of participants obeyed up to
the strongest level, in Australia the figure dropped to 40%. Clearly quite a
substantial proportion of people are willing to carry out callous and sadistic
acts when they are told to do so. **They are willing to obey**.

This is information is not simply interesting. It has import to everyone here.
Although Milgram's experiment took place in a rather artificial environment,
its general implications have been shown to carry through into the real world.
"With numbing regularity good people were to seen to knuckle under to the
demands of authority and perform actions that were callous and severe". To
guard against this destructive obedience we must all retain a skeptical stance
towards authority and those who give orders. Obedience is necessary for society
to function but one should only obey orders that one considers legitimate - not
just obey because of the position of the person giving those orders. As an
interesting closing point it was found that "people who do not authority
figures and people who insist on controlling their actions are less obedient in
the Milgram situation than are more trusting peers." Many acts of obedience to
appalling, even genocidal, orders might have avoided if ordinary citizens were
more willing to challenge authority figures and governments.


